---
layout: page
title: Specification (v0.2.0-alpha)
permalink: /specification/v0_2_0
---

# Status

This page presents version **0.2.0-alpha** of USEF, which has been [superceded](/specification/latest). The specification uses [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) to clearly signal any breaking changes. The specification is still in an early alpha stage and is likely to change before the initial 1.0 release.

If you catch an error in the specification’s text, or if you want to contribute to evolving the specification, or if you write an implementation, please let us know by opening an issue or pull request at our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/biirrr/USEF).

# Introduction

The User Study Exchange Format (USEF) is a specification for the exchange of parts of or complete User Studies. In particular it focuses on those aspects that gather self-reported responses from study participants.

It defines both the core data-types to be used and generic instances for some of these data-types.

# Conventions

The key words “**MUST**”, “**MUST NOT**”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

# Core and Optional

The USEF is split into core and optional parts. Conforming implementations **MUST** implement all core parts of the specification and MAY implement all optional parts. Conforming implementations **MUST** be able to interoperate with other implementations that do or do not implement the optional parts.

# Data-Format

The USEF uses [JSON:API](https://jsonapi.org) as its data-format. In particular it uses the compound JSON:API document structure to store all required data in a single file, without requiring access to additional, external resources. An USEF document **MUST** also conform to the rules specified in the JSON:API specification.

# Data-Types

The USEF consists of one core and four optional data-types. The ``Question`` is the only core data-type and represents both generic questions (single input, multiple choice, ...) and specific questions (gender, age, education, ...) and **MUST** be implemented by all conforming implementations. The three optional data-types are the ``Page``, representing a collection of ``Questions``, the ``Study``, representing a collection ``Pages``, and the ``Transition``, representing the transitions between ``Pages``.

## Question

The ``Question`` is the primary building block of the USEF and the only data-type that is core and **MUST** be implemented by all conforming implementations. The ``Question`` is used to represent both generic questions (single input, multiple choice, ...), where the researcher using the ``Question`` must provide further details before it can be shown to study participants, and also specific questions (gender, age, education, ...) that can be re-used as they are.

The ``Question`` object **MUST** have the following members:

* ``id``: The identifier of the ``Question``, which must be unique with regards to all ``Questions`` in the document.
* ``type``: ``"questions"``.
* ``links``: A single [links object](#links).
* ``attributes``: A single [question attributes object](#question-attributes).
* ``relationships``: A single [question relationships object](#question-relationships) (the only exception is the core
  [USEFQuestion](#USEFquestion), which does not have any relationships).

The ``Question`` implements an inheritance hierarchy, which includes a set of 9 [standard questions](#standard_questions) that **MUST** be implemented. The inheritance is important for the [question attributes object](#question-attributes), as attributes are inherited from all ancestor ``Questions``.

An example question would look like this:

```
{
  "id": "AgeQuestion"
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://example.org/my-study/questions/gender"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "title": "Please select your age band:"
    "answers": [
      "1",
      "2",
      "3",
      "4",
      "5",
      "6",
      "7",
      "8"
    ],
    "labels": [
      "< 18",
      "18 - 25",
      "26 - 35",
      "36 - 45",
      "46 - 55",
      "56 - 65",
      "66 - 75",
      "> 75"
    ],
    "version": "1.0.0"
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFSingleChoice"
      }
    }
  }
}
```


### Question Attributes

The question attributes object **MUST** contain the following key:

* ``version``: A [semantic version number](https://semver.org/).

Additionally it **MAY** contain all the attributes that define the question to be shown to the participant. The values
for each question attributes **MUST** be drawn from one of the following three categories:

* ``null``: This key **MUST** be ignored by conforming implementations.
* an object: This key **MUST** be interpreted as listed below
* other value: To be treated as a constant value that **MUST** be used as provided.

#### Question Attribute Object

The Question Attribute Object defines how the attribute value is to be acquired. It **MUST** contain the following keys:

* ``source``: The source to acquire the attribute value from. It **MUST** be set to ``"user"``.
* ``type``: The type of value to be acquired. It **MUST** be one of

  * ``"singleValue"``: A single value to be acquired from the user.
  * ``"multiLineTextValue"``: A single value to be acquired from the user using a multi-line textbox.
  * ``"booleanValue"``: A boolean value to be acquired from the user.
  * ``"listOfValues"``: A list of values to be acquired from the user.

Additionally it **MAY** contain any of the following keys:

* ``allowed``: A list of values that are allowed for this attribute.

### Question Relationships

The question relationships object **MUST** contain the following key:

* ``parent``: A resource linkage object [as specified in JSON:API](https://jsonapi.org/format/#document-resource-object-linkage). This **MUST** include the ``data`` key to identify the linked object in the included [resource objects](https://jsonapi.org/format/#document-resource-objects). The type of the linked object **MUST** be another ``Question``. If a ``parent`` ``Question`` is provided, then any properties and relationships specified in the parent ``Question`` are inherited, but **MAY** be overriden by specifying that attribute. The exception is the ``version`` key, which **MUST** be provided for each ``Question``.

### Standard Questions

The USEF provides the following eight base questions which **MUST** be supported:

* [USEFQuestion](#USEFquestion)
* [USEFDisplay](#USEFdisplay)
* [USEFSingleLineInput](#USEFsinglelineinput)
* [USEFMuliLineInput](#USEFmultilineinput)
* [USEFSingleChoice](#USEFsinglechoice)
* [USEFMultiChoice](#USEFmultichoice)
* [USEFHidden](#USEFhidden)
* [USEFSingleChoiceGrid](#USEFsinglechoicegrid)
* [USEFMultiChoiceGrid](#USEFmultichoicegrid)

#### USEFQuestion

The ``USEFQuestion`` is the root ``Question`` type, from which all other ``Questions`` **MUST** inherit. It has three
attributes:

* ``title``: The title displayed to study participants.
* ``required``: Whether a response to the question is required or not. The value **MUST** be one of ``true`` or
  ``false``.

```
{
  "id": "USEFQuestion",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/questions/USEFQuestion/v0_2_0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "title": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "singleValue"
    },
    "required":{
      "source": "user",
      "type": "booleanValue"
    }
  }
}
```

#### USEFDisplay

The ``USEFDisplay`` is a question that is used to display information to the study participants without requiring
them to provide any response. It has four attributes:

* ``title``: Overrides the parent [USEFQuestion](#USEFQuestion), setting it to ``null`` as all information to display
  to the participant **MUST** be in the ``content`` attribute.
* ``required``: Overrides the parent [USEFQuestion](#USEFQuestion), setting it to ``null`` as this question does not
  generate any response.
* ``content``: The content to show to the participant.
* ``format``: The format to use for interpreting the ``content``. All conforming applications **MUST** support the
  ``format``s ``text/text`` (interpret the ``content`` as pure text) and ``text/html`` (interpret the ``content`` as HTML5).

```
{
  "id": "USEFDisplay",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/questions/USEFDisplay/0.2.0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "title": null,
    "required": null,
    "content": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "muliLineTextValue"
    },
    "format": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "singleValue"
    }
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFQuestion"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### USEFSingleLineInput

The ``USEFSingleLineInput`` is a question that allows the study participant to provide a single textual response. It
has a single attribute:

* ``validation``: Validation to apply to the participant's response as a regular expression.

```
{
  "id": "USEFSingleLineInput",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/questions/USEFSingleLineInput/v0_2_0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "validation": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "singleValue"
    }
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFQuestion"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### USEFMultiLineInput

The ``USEFMultiLineInput`` is a question that allows the study participant to provide a multi-line textual response.
It has no additional attributes.

```
{
  "id": "USEFMultiLineInput",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/questions/USEFMultiLineInput/v0_2_0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0"
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFQuestion"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### USEFSingleChoice

The ``USEFSingleChoice`` is a question that allows the study participant to select a response from a selection of
pre-defined responses. It has three attributes:

* ``values``: The list of values that the participant can select from.
* ``labels``: The list of labels to show for the values. If no ``labels`` are provided, then the ``values`` are directly
  showed to the participants.
* ``display``: How to display the ``values`` / ``labels``, **MUST** be one of ``dropdown`` (display as a drop-down
  selection where only the selected value is visible), ``vertical list`` (display as a vertical list to select from,
  where all values are visible), or ``horizontal list`` (display as a horizontal list to select from, where all values
  are visible).

```
{
  "id": "USEFSingleChoice",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/questions/USEFSingleChoice/v0_2_0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "values": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "labels": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "display": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "singleValue",
      "allowed": ["dropdown", "vertical list", "horizontal list"]
    }
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFQuestion"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### USEFMultiChoice

The ``USEFMultiChoice`` is a question that allows the study participant to select one or more responses from a
selection of pre-defined responses. It has three attributes:

* ``values``: The list of values that the participant can select from.
* ``labels``: The list of labels to show for the values. If no ``labels`` are provided, then the ``values`` are shown
  to the participants.
* ``display``: How to display the ``values`` / ``labels``, **MUST** be one of ``multiselect`` (display as a list
  selection where only a sub-set of the values is visible), ``vertical list`` (display as a vertical list to select
  from, where all values are visible), or ``horizontal list`` (display as a horizontal list to select from, where all
  values are visible).

```
{
  "id": "USEFMultiChoice",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/questions/USEFMultiChoice/v0_2_0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "values": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "labels": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "display": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "singleValue",
      "allowed": ["multiselect", "vertical list", "horizontal list"]
    }
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFQuestion"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### USEFHidden

The ``USEFHidden`` is a question that represents a hidden response. It has the following attribute:

* ``value``: The value to use as the hidden response

```
{
  "id": "USEFHidden",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/questions/USEFHidden/v0_2_0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "title": null,
    "value": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "singleValue"
    }
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFQuestion"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### USEFSingleChoiceGrid

The ``USEFSingleChoiceGrid`` is a question that shows the participants a number of rows and for each row the participant
can select one response from a selection of pre-defined responses. All rows share the same set of pre-defined responses.
It has the following four attributes:

* ``column_values``: The list of values that the participant can select from.
* ``column_labels``: The list of labels to show for the values. If no ``column_labels`` are provided, then the
  ``column_values`` are shown to the participants.
* ``row_values``: The list of unique values identifying each row.
* ``row_labels``: The list of labels to show for each row. If no ``row_labels`` are provided, then the ``row_values``
  are shown to the participants.

```
{
  "id": "USEFSingleChoiceGrid",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/questions/USEFSingleChoiceGrid/v0_2_0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "column_values": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "column_labels": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "row_values": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "row_labels": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    }
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFQuestion"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### USEFMultiChoiceGrid

The ``USEFMultiChoiceGrid`` is a question that shows the participants a number of rows and for each row the participant
can select one or more responses from a selection of pre-defined responses. All rows share the same set of pre-defined
responses. It has the following four attributes:

* ``column_values``: The list of values that the participant can select from.
* ``column_labels``: The list of labels to show for the values. If no ``column_labels`` are provided, then the
  ``column_values`` are shown to the participants.
* ``row_values``: The list of unique values identifying each row.
* ``row_labels``: The list of labels to show for each row. If no ``row_labels`` are provided, then the ``row_values``
  are shown to the participants.

```
{
  "id": "USEFMultiChoiceGrid",
  "type": "questions",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://biirrr.github.io/usef/USEFMultiChoiceGrid/v0_2_0.json"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "column_values": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "column_labels": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "row_values": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    },
    "row_labels": {
      "source": "user",
      "type": "listOfValues"
    }
  },
  "relationships": {
    "parent": {
      "data": {
        "type": "questions",
        "id": "USEFQuestion"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Page

A ``Page`` is an ordered collection of ``Questions``, which together form a cohesive unit in the study. These might be
a set of questions that together acquire descriptive demographics about participants, but they also might be something
more focused, such as a single instrument. ``Questions`` in the ``Page`` **MUST** be displayed in the order specified
in the ``questions`` relationship.

The ``Page`` object **MUST** have the following members:

* ``id``: The identifier of the ``Page``, which must be unique with regards to all ``Pages`` in the document.
* ``type``: ``"Page"``.
* ``links``: A single [links object](#links).
* ``attributes``: A single [page attributes object](#page-attributes).
* ``relationships``: A single [page relationships object](#page-relationships).

An example ``Page`` would look like this:

```
{
  "id": "Background",
  "type": "Page",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://example.org/my-study/pages/background"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "title": "About you"
  },
  "relationships": {
    "questions": [
      {
        "data": {
          "type": "questions",
          "id": "AgeQuestion"
        }
      },
      {
        "data": {
          "type": "questions",
          "id": "GenderQuestion"
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```
### Page Attributes

The page attributes object **MUST** contain the following key:

* ``title``: The ``title`` to show to participants.

### Page Relationships

The page relationships object **MUST** contain the following key:

* ``questions``: An ordered lists of [Questions](#Question) that belong to the ``Page`` and **MUST** be displayed in the
  order specified here.

The page relationships object **MAY** contain the following key:

* ``transitions``: An ordered list of [Transitions](#Transition) that are to be used to determine the next ``Page`` to
  show to the participant. If multiple ``Transition``s are provided, then all but the last one **MUST** have conditions
  specified. To determine which ``Transition`` to follow, the ``Transition``s are evaluated in the order specified in
  this relationship.

## Study

The ``Study`` groups a set of ``Pages`` into a cohesive whole. The ordering of ``Pages`` in the ``Study`` **MUST** be
used as the ordering when displaying the ``Pages`` to participants, except if ``Transitions`` are also provided, in
which case those **MUST** be used.

The ``Study`` object **MUST** have the following members:

* ``id``: The identifier of the ``Study``.
* ``type``: ``"Study"``.
* ``links``: A single [links object](#links).
* ``attributes``: A single [study attributes object](#study-attributes).
* ``relationships``: A single [study relationships object](#study-relationships).

An example ``Study`` would look like this:

```
{
  "id": "SampleStudy",
  "type": "Study",
  "links": {
    "self": "https://example.org/my-study"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "title": "My Study",
    "description": "An example study"
  },
  "relationships": {
    "pages": [
      {
        "data": {
          "type": "Page",
          "id": "Welcome"
        }
      },
      {
        "data": {
          "type": "Page",
          "id": "Background"
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Study Attributes

The study attributes object **MUST** contain the following key:

* ``title``: The ``title`` to show to participants.

### Study Relationships

The page relationships object **MUST** contain the following key:

* ``questions``: An ordered lists of [Pages](#Page) that belong to the ``Study`` and **MUST** be displayed in the
  order specified here. The exception is if [Transitions](#Transition) are provided, then any ``Transition``s specified
  on an individual ``Page`` override the order specified here. If there are no ``Transitions`` for a ``Page`` or all
  ``Transitions`` specified for a ``Page`` have conditions that do not hold, then the next ``Page`` to display **MUST**
  be determined by the order of this attribute.

## Transition

The ``Transition`` represents the link between two ``Pages``, the source ``Page`` the participant views first and the target ``Page`` the participant transitions to after completing the source ``Page``'s ``Questions``.

A ``Page`` can have multiple ``Transitions``, provided that the ``Transitions`` have conditions specified on them. In its initial version the USEF only supports a single condition type, namely ``Transitions`` conditional on responses provided by participants to previous ``Questions``.

The ``Transition`` object **MUST** have the following members:

* ``id``: The identifier of the ``Transition``.
* ``type``: ``"Study"``.
* ``links``: A single [links object](#links).
* ``attributes``: A single [transition attributes object](#transition-attributes).
* ``relationships``: A single [transition relationships object](#transition-relationships).

An example ``Transition`` would look like this:

```
{
  "id": "NoConsentTransition",
  "type": "Transition",
  "link": {
    "self": "https://example.org/my-study/pages/Welcome/NoConsentTransition"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "condition": {
      "type": "response",
      "page": "Welcome",
      "questions": ""
    }
  },
  "relationships": {

  }
}
```

### Transition Attributes

The transition attributes object **MAY** contain the following key:

* ``condition``: A [Condition](#Condition) object.

#### Condition

The condition object **MUST** contain the following key:

* ``type``: The type of condition. **MUST** be "response".

Which other keys **MUST** be specified depends on the ``type`` attribute.

##### Condition Type ``"response"``

The ``"response"`` condition defines a conditional transition based on the participant's response to a question. It
**MUST** contain the following keys:

* ``page``: The unique identifier of the ``Page`` that the response was recorded from.
* ``question``: The unique identifier of the ``Question`` that the response was recorded for.
* ``value``: The value to compare the response to.
* ``comparison``: The comparison operator **MUST** be one of ``"=="`` (the condition holds if the response is equal to
  the ``value``) or ``"!="`` (the condition holds if the response is not equal to the ``value``).

The response **MAY** also contain the following key **IF** the ``Question`` is a ``USEFSingleChoiceGrid``
or ``USEFMultiChoiceGrid``:

* ``row``: The value from the ``row_values`` attribute that the response was recorded for.

### Transition Relationships

The transition relationships object **MUST** contain the following key:

* ``target``: The [Page](#Page) to transition to **IF** no condition is specified or if the condition holds.
